okay this is linear algebra lecture
four and uh the first thing I have to do
is something that was on the list for
last time but here it is now what's the
inverse of a product If I multiply two
matrices together and I know they're
inverses how do I get the inverse of a *
B so I know what inverses mean for a
single Matrix a and for a matrix B what
Matrix do I multiply by to get the
identity if I have AB okay that that'll
be simple but so basic
then uh then I'm going to use use that
to I will have a product of
matrices and the product that we'll meet
will be these elimination matrices and
the net result of today's
lecture is the big formula for
elimination so the the net result of
today's lecture is this is this great
way to look
at gaussian elimination we know that we
get from a to U by elimination we know
the steps but now we get the right way
to look at it AAL Lu so that's the high
point for today okay can I take the easy
part the the first step first uh
so suppose a is
invertible and of course it's going to
be a big question when is a matrix
invertible but let's say a is invertible
and B is invertible
then what Matrix gives me the inverse of
ab so so that's the direct question
what's the inverse of ab do I multiply
those separate
inverses yes I I multiply the two
matrices a inverse and B inverse but
what order do I
multiply in reverse order and you see
why so the the right thing to put here
is B inverse a inverse that the inverse
I'm after I we we can just check that AB
times that Matrix gives the identity
okay so why once again it's this fact
that I can move parentheses around I can
actually I can just erase them all and
do the multiplications any way I want to
so what's the right multiplication to do
first B * B inverse this this product
here is the
identity then a * the identity is the
identity and then finally a * a inverse
gives the
idty
so forgive the dumb dumb example in the
book it's just why do you why do you uh
do the inverse things in reverse order
it's just like taking you take off your
shoes you take off your socks then the
good way to invert that process is socks
back on first then
Sho sorry okay I'm sorry that's on tape
but all
right um and of course on the other side
we should really just check on the other
side I'd have B inverse a inverse that
does multiply a b and this time it's
these guys that give the identity
squeeze down they give the identity
we're in shape okay so there's the there
where's the
inverse good while we're at it let me do
a transpose cuz the next lecture has got
a lot to involves
transposes so how do I if I transpose a
matrix I'm talking about square and
vertial matrices right now if I
transpose
one what's its inverse well the nice
formula
is let's see let me start from a
a inverse equal the
identity and let me transpose both
sides that that will bring a transpose
into the picture so if I transpose the
identity
Matrix what do I have the identity right
if I if I exchange rows and columns the
identity is a symmetric Matrix it
doesn't know the difference if I
transpose these guys
that product then again it turns
out that I have to trans I have to
reverse the order I can transpose them
separately but when I multiply those
transposes come in the opposite order so
it's a inverse
transpose time a
transpose giving the identity so that's
this equation it just comes directly
from that one but this equation tells me
what I wanted to know namely what is the
inverse of this guy a
transpose what's the inverse of that if
I transpose a
matrix what what's the inverse of the
result and this equation telling me that
here it is this
is this
is the inverse this is the inverse of a
transer inverse of a trans
[Applause]
of
a I I
just so I'll put a big circle around
that because that's the
answer we that's the best answer we
could hope
for that if you want to know the inverse
of a
transpose and you know the inverse of a
then you just transpose that so in in to
put it another way transpose and
inversing you can do in either order for
a
single okay so that these are like basic
facts that we can now use all right so
now I put it to
use I put it to use by thinking we're
we're really
completing uh the subject of
elimination
actually
I the thing about elimination
is it's it's the right way to to
understand what the Matrix has got this
AAL L is the most basic factorization of
a
matrix um it's it's I always worry that
you will think this course is
just uh is all
elimination it's just throw
operations and please don't it's it will
will be beyond
that uh but it's the right uh it's the
right uh algebra to do first okay so I'm
coming near the end of it but I want to
get it in a decent form so my decent
form is Matrix
form I have a matrix
a let's suppose it's a good Matrix I can
do elimination no row exchanges so no
row exchanges for
now
pivots all fine nothing zero in the
pivot position I get to the very end
which is U so I get from a to U and I
want to know what's the connection how
is a related to you and this is going to
tell me that there's a matrix L that
connects okay can I can I do it for a 2X
two
first okay 2 by two uh elimination okay
so I'll do it under
here okay so let let my Matrix a
be uh let's let's just we'll keep it
simple say two and an eight so we know
that the first pivot is a two and the
multiplier is going to be a four and
then let me put a one here and what
number do I not want to put
there four I don't want a four there
because in that case the second pivot
would not we wouldn't have a second
pivot The Matrix would be singular
General screw up okay so let me put some
other number here like
seven
okay okay now I want to operate on that
with my elementary
Matrix so what's what's the elementary
Matrix I'm I'll strictly speaking it's
E21 because it's it's the guy that's
going to produce a zero in that position
and it's going to produce you in one in
one shot because it's just a 2X two
Matrix uh so 2 one and I'm going to take
four of those away from those produce
that zero and leave a three there and
that's you and what's the Matrix that
did it quick review then what's the
elimination Elementary Matrix E2 2 1
it's 1 Z thanks
and -41 right good okay so that I I you
see the difference between this and what
I'm shooting for I'm shooting for a on
one side
and the other matrices on the other side
of the equation okay so I can do that
right
away now I'm now here's going to be my
AAL l and you won't have any trouble
telling me what uh so a is still
2187 L is what you're going to tell me
and U is still 2 1
03 okay so what's l in this
case well first so how is L related to
this e
gu it's the inverse because I want
multiply through by the inverse of this
which will put the identity here and the
inverse will show up there and I'll call
it
l so what is the inverse of this
remember that's uh those those
elimination matrices are easy to
invert the inverse Matrix for this one
is 1
Z
41 it's it has the plus sign because it
adds back what this removes okay do you
want so if if we did the numbers right
we must this this should be correct okay
and of course it is that that says the
first row is Right four * the first row
plus the second row is 87 good okay
that's simple 2x two but it already
shows the form that we're headed
for it shows so what's the L stand for
why the letter L If U stood for upper
triangular then of course L stands for
lower triangle and actually it has ones
on the
diagonal where this thing has the pivots
on the diet oh sometimes uh we may want
to separate out the pivot so can I just
mention that sometimes we could also
write this as
we could have this
one41 I'll just show you how I would
divide out this Matrix of pivots 2 3
there's a diagonal
matrix and I've just whatever is left is
here now what
left if I divide this first row by two
to pull out the two then I have a one
and a
1/2 and if I divide the second row by
three to pull out the three then I have
a one so that's the if this is l u this
is maybe called l d for pivot U and now
it's a little more
balanced because we have ones on the
diagonal here and here and the diagonal
matrix in the middle so both of those
mat lab would would uh produce uh either
one
I I'll basically stay with
L
okay now I have to think about bigger
than 2x
two right now this was just like easy
exercise and to tell the truth
that this one with a minus sign and this
one with a plus sign uh I mean that's
the only
difference
but with 3x3 there's a more significant
difference let me let me show you how
that works let me let me uh move up to a
3X3 let's say some Matrix
a
okay just imagine it's 3x3 I won't write
numbers down for now so what what's the
first elimination step that I do the
first Matrix I multiply it by what what
what letter will I use for that it's the
it it be e to one because it's the it's
the first step will be to get a to get a
zero in that 21 position and then the
next step will be to get a zero in the
31 position and the final step will be
to get a zero in the 32
position that's what elimination is and
it produce you and again no row
exchange we
will I'm taking the nice case now the
typical case too when I don't have to do
any row exchange all I do is these
elimination steps okay now suppose I
want that stuff over on the right hand
side as I really do that that's like my
point here I I can multiply these
together to get a matrix e but I want it
over on the right I want its inverse
over
there so what what's the what's the
right expression now how if I write a
and u what goes
there okay so I've got the inverse of
this I've got three matrices in a row
now and it's their inverses that are
going to show up cuz each one is easy to
invert question is what about the whole
bunch how how how easy is it to invert
the whole bunch
so that's what we know how to do we know
how to invert we should take the
separate inverses but they go in the
opposite order so what goes
here e32 inverse right cuz I'll multiply
from the left by e32 inverse it'll pop
it up next to
you and then we come E31 inverse
and then this will be I'll be this will
be the only guy left standing and that's
gone when I do an E21 inverse so there
is L that's that's l
u l is this product of
inverses now you still can ask why is
this guy preferring
inverses and let me explain why let me
explain why why is this product nicer
than this
one this this product turns out to be
better than this
one let me take a typical case
here uh let me let me take a typical
case so so let me I have to do 3x3 for
you to see the see the Improvement 2 by
two there was just one e no no problem
but let me go up to this case suppose my
matrices
E21 suppose E21 has a has a minus two in
there suppose that and now suppose oh
I'll even suppose
E31 is the
identity so I'll just I'm just going to
I'm going to make the point with just a
couple of
these okay now this guy will have do
something now let let's suppose -
5 what okay there's
temp that's a typical case in which we
didn't need an E31 maybe we already had
a zero in that 31 position
okay let me see if that is that going to
be enough
to uh show my point let's let me do that
multiplication
okay so if I do that multiplication this
is it's like good practice to multiply
these matrices tell me what's above the
diagonal when I do this
multiplication all zeros when I do this
multiplication I'm going to get ones on
the diagonal and Zer
above because what does that say that
says that I'm subtracting rows from
lower rows so nothing nothing is moving
upwards as it did last time in in G
Jordan okay now so really the uh what I
have to do is check this - 2 1 Z now
this is so what am I what's that number
that this is the number that I'm really
have in mind that number
is
10 and this one
is what goes here Row three against
column two looks like the minus5
what it's that 10 how did that 10 get in
there I don't like that 10 I mean of
course I don't want to erase it because
it's right but I don't wanted that uh
it's because the 10 got in there because
I subtracted two of Row one from row two
and then I subtracted five of that new
row two from Row three so doing it in
that
order how did Row one affect Row
three well it did cuz two of it got
removed from row two and then five of
those got removed from Row three so alog
together
10 of Row one got got thrown into Row
three now my point is in the reverse
Direction so now I can do now I'll do
below it I'll do the
inverses okay and of course opposite
order reverse order reverse
order okay so now this is going to this
is the this is the
E that go goes on the left side left of
a now I'm going to do the inverses in
the opposite order so what's the so so
the opposite order means I put this
Inverse
First and what is its inverse what's the
inverse of
E21 same thing with a plus sign right
for for this for the individual matrices
instead of taking away two I add back
two of Row one to row two so no
problem and now in reverse order I want
to invert that just just right I'm doing
just this this so now the inverse is
again the same thing but add in the
five and now I'll do that
multiplication and I'll get a
happy
result I
hope did I do it right so far yes okay
let me do the multiplication I believe
this comes out so Row one of the answer
is 1 0 oh I know that all this is going
to be that right then I have 2 1 0 so I
get 2 1 0 there
right and what's the third
row what's the third row in this
product just read it out to me the third
row 0 5
1 because I I mean one way to say is
this is saying take one of the last row
and there it is
and this is my Matrix L and it's the one
that goes to the left it goes on the
left of you it goes into this is by what
do I mean
here maybe maybe rather than saying left
of a left of U let me write down again
what I mean e a is
U whereas a is l u
okay let let me let me make the point
now in
words the the order that the matrices
come for L is the right order the two
and the five
don't sort of
interfere to produce this tent in the in
the right order the multipliers just sit
in the Matrix
L that's that's the point that the so
that that if I want to know
l i I have no work to do I just keep a
record of what those multipliers were
and that gives me l so so I'll I'll draw
the draw the
um so let let me let me state so this is
this is the AAL
Lu so if no row exchanges
the
multipliers those numbers that we
multiplied rows by and subtracted when
we did an elimination steps the
multipliers go
directly into
L okay
so
so so L is this is the way
uh to look at
elimination that uh the you go through
the elimination steps and actually if if
you do it right you can you can throw
away a as you create L
andu it if you think about it though
steps of
elimination as you when you've done when
you've finished with row two of a you've
created a new row two of U which you
have to save and you've created the
multipliers that you used which you have
to save and then you can forget hey so
the because it's all there in L and U so
that's uh that's like
I this may this moment is maybe
the the new uh Insight in elimination
that comes
from Matrix doing it in Matrix form so
it was the product of of
ease is we we can't see what that
product of ease is that the Matrix e is
not particularly attractive what's great
is when we put them on the other side
they're inverses in the opposite order
there the L comes out just F okay
now oh gosh so today is a sort of like
practical day
uh can I can we think
together how expensive is
elimination how much how many operations
do we do so I so this is now kind of new
topic which I didn't list
as on the program but here it came here
it
comes how
many
operations on an N byn
Matrix
[Applause]
a I mean it's a very practical question
can can we can we solve systems of order
a
thousand uh in a second or a minute or a
week can we solve systems of order a
million in a
second or an hour or a week I mean
what's the if it's n
byn we we often want to take in bigger I
mean we put in more information
we make the the whole thing is more
accurate for the bigger
Matrix but it's more expensive too and
the question is how much more expensive
if I go if I have uh matrices of order
100 let's say 100 by 100 let me let me
take n to be
100 say n equal
100 how
many steps are we doing how many
operations are we actually doing that we
that or or not we the and let's Suppose
there aren't any zeros cuz of course if
the if the Matrix has got a lot of zeros
in good places we don't have to do those
operations and uh it'll be much
faster but so just think for a moment
about the first step so here's our
Matrix a 100 by
100 and the first step will
be that column is got zeros down
here so it's it's down to 99 by
99 right that that that's really like
the
first uh stage of elimination to get
from this 100 by 100 nonzero Matrix to
this stage where the first pivot is
sitting up here and the first row is
okay and the first column is
okay so essentially I what did how many
steps did that take you see I'm I'm
trying to get an idea is the
answer proportional to n is the is the
total number of steps in elimination the
total number is at proportional to n in
which case if I double n from 100 to 200
does it take me twice as long does it
Square so it would take me four times as
long does it Cube so it would take me 8
times as long or is it n factorial so it
would take me 100 times as
long I I think you know from a practical
point of view we have to have some idea
of the cost
here so so the these are the questions
let me ask those questions again is it
proportional it does it go like n like N
squared like n cubed like some higher
power of n like n factorial
where where every step up multiplies by
100 and then by 101 and then by 102
which is
it okay so that's the only way I know to
answer that is to is to Think Through
what we actually had to
do okay so how much what was the cost
here well let's see what do I mean by an
operation I guess I mean uh
um well an addition or yeah no big deal
I guess I mean an addition or a
subtraction or a multiplication or a
division
okay uh and actually what operation am I
doing all the time I'm I'm uh when I
when I multiply Row one by a multiplier
L and I subtract from row six
what's happening there individually what
what's the what's going on if I multiply
I do a multiplication by L and then a
subtraction so I I guess
operation can I count that for the
moment as like one operation or you may
want to count them separately the
typical operation is
multiply plus a
subtract so if I count those together
uh my answer is going to come out half
as many as if if I count them separately
I'd have a certain number of multiplies
certain number of subtracts that that's
really what I want to do okay how many
have I got here so uh I
think let's
see it's
about well how many roughly how many
operations to to get from here to here
well maybe one way to look at it is all
these numbers had to get
changed all the first row didn't get
changed but but all the other rows got
changed at this step so this step well I
guess maybe shall I say it cost about
this cost about about 100
squar I mean if I Chang the first row
then then it would have been exactly 100
squar because CU that's how many numbers
are here 100 100 squared numbers is the
is the total count of the entries and
all but this insignificant first row got
changed so I would say about 100
squared okay now what about the next
step so now the first row is fine the
second row is
fine and I'm changing and these zeros
are all fine so what's what's up at the
second step and then you're with me
roughly what's the cost if this if this
first step cost 100 squar about
operations then this one which is really
working on this guy to produce this cost
about
what how many operations to fix about 99
squ or 99 * 98 but less right less cuz
our problem is getting smaller about 99
squar and then I go down and down the
next one will be 98 Square the next 97
squar and finally I'm down around 1
squar or where it's just
like just Little Numbers the big numbers
are here so the the number of operation
is
about N2 plus that was n right n was 100
it n s for the first step then n -1 2ar
then N - 2 2ar finally down to 3 2 and 2
2 and even 1
SAR no way I should have written
that squeeze that in let me try so the
count is
n^2 + n -1 squ plus all the way down to
s that's that's a pretty decent count
yeah admittedly we didn't we didn't
catch every single tiny operation but we
got the right
uh the the right leading term here and
what do those add up
to okay so now we're at we're coming to
the punch of this uh question this
operation count so this is the
operations on the left side on The
Matrix
a to finally get to
you and anybody so which of which of
these uh quantities is the right
ballpark for that count if I add 100
squar to 99 s to 98 squ 97 squar all the
way down 2 squar and 1
squared what what what am I what have I
got
about it's it's one of these so tell
let's identify it first is it n
certainly
not is it is it n
factorial no if it was n factorial we
would with determinance it is n
factorial I'll put in a bad Mark against
determinance because that that uh okay
so what is
it it's and
well this is the answer it's it's it's
it's this order
NQ it's like I have n
terms right I've got n terms in
sum uh and the biggest one is n s so the
the the worst it could be would be n
cubed but it's not as bad as it's n Cub
times there's a it's
about 1/3 of
NQ that's the that's the magic uh
operation
C somehow that oneir takes account of
the fact that
the the numbers are getting
smaller if they weren't getting smaller
we would have n terms times n s would be
exactly n Cub but our numbers are
getting smaller actually do you remember
where where does 1/3 come in this I'll
I'll even allow a mention of
calculus so calculus can be mentioned
integration can be mentioned now in the
next minute and and not again for weeks
it's not that I don't like 1801 but 1806
is better okay so uh so what's what's
the calculus formula that that looks
like it looks like an a sum is like if
we were in calculus instead of summing
stuff we
would integrate so I would integrate
X2 and I would
get 1/3 x cub
so so if that was like an integral from
1 to
n of x^2 DX it the answer would be 1/3 n
cub and it's correct for the sum also
because that's like the whole point of
calculus the whole point of calculus is
oh I don't want to tell you the I mean
you know the whole point of calculus
calculus is like sums except it's
continuous
okay and we're and algebra is discreete
okay so the answer is 1/3 NQ now I'll
just let me let me say one more thing
about
operations what about the right hand
side this was what it cost on the left
sub count this is on
a this is a that we're working with but
what's the cost on the extra column
Vector B that we're we're hanging around
here so B B costs a lot less
obviously cuz it's just one column we
carry it through
elimination and then actually we do back
substitution let me just tell you the
answer there it's n
s so the cost for every right hand side
is
n² so let me I'll just fit that in here
for the rights for the the cost of
B of B turns out to be
n²
so you see if we have as we often have
uh a matrix a and several right hand
sides uh then we pay the price on a the
higher price on a to get it split up
into L and U to do elimin on a but then
we can process every right hand side at
at low cost okay so the the that's we
really have discussed the most
fundamental algorithm of uh of for a
system of
equations
okay so uh I'm
ready to
allow roow
exchanges I'm ready to allow now what
happens to this whole today's lecture if
there are row
exchanges when would there be row
exchanges there row we need to do row
exchanges if a zero shows up in the
pivot position so I'm I'm moving then
into the final section of this
chapter which is about transposes well
we've already seen some transposes
and uh so what's the the ti the title of
this section
is
um transposes and
permutation okay so can I say now where
does a permutation come
in let me talk a little about
permutation so that'll be up here
permutation
so these are the matrices that I need to
do row
exchanges and I may have to do two row
exchanges is it can you invent a matrix
where I would have to do two row
exchanges and then it would come out
fine yeah let's just for the heck of it
uh so I'll put it
here let me do
3x3
actually why don't I just plain list all
the 3X3 permutation matrices they're a
nice little group of them what are all
the
matrices
that exchange no rows at all well I'll
include the
identity so that's a permutation Matrix
that doesn't do anything now what's the
permutation Matrix that
exchanges what is P1 2 the permutation
Matrix that exchanges rows one and two
would
be 0 1
0 1 0 0 right I just exchanged those
rows of the identity and I've got it
okay actually I'll yeah let me let me
not clut this
up okay give me a complete list of all
the row exchange matrices so what are
they they're all the ways I can take the
identity Matrix and rearrange its rows
how how many will there
be how many 3x3 permutation
matrices should we keep going and get
the answer so tell me some more
zero okay what one are you going to do
now I'm switch rows one and three one
and three okay one and
three leaving two
alone okay now what
else switch what are we the next easy
one is switch two and three good so I'll
leave one0 alone and I'll switch I'll
move number three up and number two
down okay those are the ones that just
exchange single single a pair of
roads this guy this guy and this guy
exchanges a pair of roads but now there
are more possibilities what are they
what's what's
left so tell there is another one
here what's that change it's going to
move it's going to change all rows right
what where should we put them so give me
a first
row 0 1 0 okay now a second row say 0 0
1 and the third guy 1 0
0 so that that is like a cycle that
puts row two moves up to row one row
three moves up to row two and Row one
moves down to row three and there's one
more which which
is let's see H what's
left is it 0 0 1
okay 1 0 0
okay 0 1 0
okay great six six
of 6
p and and they're sort of nice because
what happens if I like um multiply two
of them
together if I multiply two of these
matrices together what can you tell me
about the
answer it's on the
list if I if I do some row exchanges and
then I do some more row exchanges then
altogether I've done row exchanges so if
I multiply
but I don't know and if I
invert then just doing row exchanges to
get back again so the inverses are all
there it's it's a it's a little family
of
matrices that like
uh they've got their own If I multiply
I'm still inside this group if I invert
I'm inside this group actually group is
the right name for this it's a group of
six
matrices and what about the inverses
what's the inverse of this guy for
example
what's the inverse if I exchange rows
one and two what's the inverse
Matrix just tell me fast the inverse of
that Matrix is if I
is if I exchange rows one and two then
what I should do back to get back to
where I started is the same thing so
this thing is its own
inverse this is that's probably its own
inverse this is not actually I think
these are inverses of each other oh yeah
actually the inverse is the transpose
there's a curious
fact about permutation matrices that the
inverses are the
transposed and final moment how many are
there if I how many 4x4 permutation so
let me take
4x4 how many P's
well
okay make a good
guess 24 right 24 P okay so uh we've got
these permutation matrixes and in the
next uh
lecture uh we use them so the next
lecture finishes chapter two and move to
chapter
3 thank you